Abstract
Sinonasal neoplasms are a remarkably heterogeneous group, reflecting the numerous tissue types present in the nasal cavity and paranasal sinuses. These entities can be relatively benign (ie, respiratory epithelial adenomatoid hamartoma) or can be exceedingly aggressive (ie, NUT carcinoma). Certain sinonasal tumors have a propensity to spread through local invasion and destruction, while others have a high likelihood of perineural spread. The genetic and molecular mechanisms underlying sinonasal tumor behavior have recently become better understood, and new tumor types have been described using these genetic and molecular data. This has prompted an expansion in the number of tumors included in the World Health Organization fifth edition classification system for head and neck tumors, along with a new classification structure. Radiologists’ familiarity with this classification structure is crucial to understanding the expected behavior of these tumors and to collaboration with the multidisciplinary cancer care board in making decisions for optimal patient care.

Sinonasal tumors are a heterogeneous group, reflecting a wide variety of tissues present in the nasal cavity and paranasal sinuses. Although sinonasal malignancies are relatively rare, comprising approximately 3% of all head and neck malignancies, these tumors can have a devastating effect because patients tend to present with relatively advanced disease (1).

The understanding of sinonasal tumors has evolved, with an increasing awareness of their distinctive molecular and genetic characteristics. These tumors are often prognostically significant, and a greater understanding of tumor genetics is hoped to allow more targeted and individualized therapy. Therefore, in 2022 the World Health Organization (WHO) released a new classification system for head and neck tumors, with an emphasis on tumor molecular and genetic characteristics (2).

The addition of this new WHO classification scheme provides an opportunity to review the assessment of sinonasal tumors from a multidisciplinary perspective. This review incorporates the updated fifth edition WHO framework to review the imaging appearance of sinonasal tumors and important multidisciplinary considerations for common tumor types.

Role of Imaging in Sinonasal Tumors
The most important role of imaging in the management of sinonasal tumors is tumor mapping, which aids in both staging and treatment planning (Table 1). This entails defining the tumor margins, including determining involvement of the sinonasal cavity subsites, surrounding soft tissues, orbital contents, intracranial compartment, perineural structures, and lymph nodes.

CT and MRI are the preferred initial imaging modalities to evaluate a patient with a new sinonasal mass, and they provide complementary information in tumor characterization (3–5). Although CT is excellent for detecting bone remodeling and erosion, MRI better demonstrates bone marrow involvement. MRI is superior for differentiating retained T2-hyperintense nonenhancing secretions from the enhancing tumor, whereas CT may falsely suggest postobstructed secretions as tumor involvement (3–6). Intraorbital and intracranial involvement are demonstrated to greater advantage on postcontrast MR images that show involvement of orbital structures, the dura, and the brain in exquisite detail. However, CT shows erosion of the skull base and orbital walls better than MRI does. Finally, perineural tumor spreading is better demonstrated on postcontrast MR images (4–6).

Differentiation of malignant tumors from benign entities is another important role of imaging and relies on specific imaging features seen at CT and MRI (Table 2). Benign conditions typically demonstrate smooth well-defined margins, displaced tissue planes, bone remodeling, and T2 signal hyperintensity at MRI (6,7). In comparison, malignant lesions are more likely to have infiltrative margins, invaded tissue planes, bone invasion, and T2 signal hypointensity relative to normal mucosa (6,7). Likewise, benign lesions often exhibit high diffusivity, while cellular tumors show low diffusivity at diffusion-weighted MRI (8). In addition, benign inflammatory polyps and mucoceles are nonenhancing or show marginal enhancement, whereas tumors demonstrate internal or heterogeneous enhancement.

WHO Classification Fifth Edition Updates
The WHO classification system for nasal, paranasal, and skull base tumors was updated in 2022 as part of the fifth edition of the WHO Classification of Tumours (2). The WHO classifies sinonasal tumors as hamartomas, respiratory epithelial lesions, mesenchymal tumors, or other tumors (2). Respiratory epithelial lesions, the dominant neoplasms in both the number of categories and the frequency of occurrence, are further subdivided into papillomas, carcinomas, and adenocarcinomas (2). The authors of the WHO update recognized that a remarkable diversity of neoplasms can also occur in these locations and focused the classification system on tumors that occur almost exclusively in this region or account for a large proportion of tumors arising from these sites. Specifically, soft-tissue tumors, melanocytic tumors, hematolymphoid tumors, and neuroendocrine neoplasms are largely excluded from the updated sinonasal classification scheme and are covered separately in other chapters (2). However, these entities still occur in the sinonasal region and must be included in the differential diagnosis of tumors arising there (9). The types of tumors detailed in the updated fifth edition WHO classification system are listed in Table 3.

Teaching Point In addition to removing some of the areas of potential duplication, the WHO formalized recognition of new entities in the fifth edition classification system on the basis of improved understanding of the genetic and molecular basis underlying sinonasal tumors. Newly recognized tumors include human papillomavirus (HPV)–related multiphenotypic carcinoma and switch/sucrose nonfermentable (SWI/SNF) complex–deficient carcinomas.
(10). These entities were provisionally included in the WHO fourth edition classification system as HPV-related carcinoma with adenoid cystic–like features and SMARCB1-deficient sinonasal carcinoma (11). New molecular mechanisms have been emphasized, including IDH mutations in sinonasal undifferentiated carcinoma (SNUC) and DEK-AFF2 mutations in squamous cell carcinoma (SCC) (2). These newly recognized tumor types are defined as subcategories of respiratory epithelial tumors and represent an improvement in the specificity of classification of these tumors. For example, the number of tumors classified as SNUCs (a diagnosis of exclusion) is expected to decrease with the updated classification system.
Radiologists’ familiarity with these tumor types is useful in anticipating the potential clinical course. For instance, HPV-related multiphenotypic carcinoma quite closely resembles adenoid cystic carcinoma at conventional histologic evaluation but differs in behavior, with a markedly lower propensity for perineural tumor spread compared with that for denoid cystic carcinoma (12). IDH-mutant sinonasal malignancies comprise 55%–80% of tumors previously classified as SNUC but are associated with a less aggressive clinical course and improved disease-specific survival (13). DEK-AFF2 carcinomas, on the other hand, demonstrate low-grade papilloma–like histologic characteristics but an aggressive clinical course, with frequent local recurrence and distant metastasis despite their bland histologic appearance (14).

Primary Malignancies of the Sinonasal Cavity: Staging
The wide variety of potential histologic characteristics of sinonasal malignancies, including tumors from epithelial, salivary, neuroendocrine, mesenchymal, osseous, and hematolymphoid origins, presents a challenge in the development of a comprehensive prognostic staging system. The current TNM classification system by the American Joint Committee on Cancer (AJCC) separates staging criteria for tumors according to maxillary, ethmoidal, and/or nasal origin, although primary ethmoidal or nasal disease is much less common (3,9). In contradistinction to that of many other head and neck malignancies, the T category, which is critical in the discrimination of stage II from stage III disease, relies heavily on the degree of involvement of specific intra- and extrasinus structures for prognostication rather than on overall tumor size. For example, involvement of the medial wall or floor of the orbit reflects stage III disease in a sinonasal malignancy of either ethmoid or maxillary origin, regardless of tumor size (Tables 4, 5).

Additional discriminators of stage III disease include involvement of the posterior maxillary sinus wall, subcutaneous tissues, pterygoid fossa, or ethmoid sinuses for tumors of maxillary origin or involvement of the palate, cribriform plate, or maxillary sinus for tumors of ethmoid or nasal origin. The T4 category is split into two subclassifications: T4a (moderated advanced local disease) and T4b (very advanced local disease). Common findings of T4b tumors of both maxillary and nasal and/or ethmoid origin include involvement of the orbital apex, anterior or middle cranial fossa, cranial nerves other than the maxillary division of the trigeminal nerve, nasopharynx, or clivus. Although it is relatively rare, lymphatic involvement mainly includes levels I–III and retropharyngeal chains and portends a dismal prognosis (15). As such, stage IV classification also includes ipsilateral single nodal involvement of greater than 3 cm or multinodal involvement on either side, regardless of the T stage. Similar to other cancers of the head and neck, extranodal extension is categorized as the highest N stage (N3b), regardless of lymph node size.

Esthesioneuroblastoma is a rare neuroendocrine tumor estimated to constitute 3%–6% of all sinonasal malignancies (16). Because of its close proximity to the floor of the anterior cranial fossa and cribriform plate, esthesioneuroblastoma has a high rate of intracranial extension and a relatively high rate of distant metastasis (17). For these reasons, several staging systems specific to esthesioneuroblastoma have been developed, with the modified Kadish system (18) being most widely used (Table 6).

Treatment Considerations
Surgical Care of Sinonasal Tumors
The primary goals in the surgical management of sinonasal tumors are complete tumor resection, minimization of the risk of injury to critical neurovascular structures, and decreasing long-term morbidity. Substantial anatomic variability and proximity to critical adjacent structures, in particular the orbit and skull base, make surgical clearance of sinonasal tumors particularly challenging (19). Classically, en bloc resection through an open approach was considered the standard of care. However, advances in endoscopic technology and increasing familiarity with endoscopic endonasal approaches have led to widespread adoption of fully endoscopic or combined open and endoscopic approaches in the management of sinonasal tumors (20).

Regardless of the approach, common oncologic principles apply in the management of malignant tumors (19). Paramount among these principles is complete oncologic resection to microscopically negative margins. Data (21) have supported similar margin status and overall survival with endonasal approaches when compared with open approaches. Identifying and adequately treating sites of tumor attachment are crucial. Endoscopic piecemeal resection allows improved visualization and identification of these attachment sites, which are then managed in an en bloc fashion (19). Review of preoperative imaging can be invaluable for identifying tumor attachment sites, particularly in the case of an inverting papilloma, which is often characterized by an area of focal hyperostosis (ie, a “bone stalk”)

The resectability of sinonasal tumors is dictated by the presence and degree of invasion of adjacent critical neurovascular structures, including the orbital apex, carotid artery, skull base, and pterygopalatine or infratemporal fossae (19). These decisions are best made on a case-by-case basis and are dictated by tumor type, surgeon experience, and patient factors.

Regional nodal disease in patients with sinonasal malignancy is present in 3%–33% of cases, with distant metastasis present in less than 7%; the presence of metastatic disease has been associated with an up to 50% reduction in survival (22). Although clinical staging is invaluable in defining treatment options, the current staging system does not provide optimal prognostic stratification in all cases. For instance, studies (23) have failed to consistently show that positive neck disease at presentation affects survival in patients with olfactory neuroblastoma. As such, high-risk features are used to guide decisions around management of regional nodal basins.

For patients pursuing curative treatment, selective neck dissection is recommended for clinically positive regional disease in most cases. However, optimal management of the clinically negative N0 neck includes some controversy. The occult metastasis rate in patients with sinonasal SCC is reported to be 12.7% (24). In olfactory neuroblastoma, delayed regional involvement is considered common, occurring in 10%–20% of cases, often 10 or more years after initial presentation (25). Moreover, delayed regional disease is associated with worse overall survival and disease-free survival. As such, in patients at high risk, elective treatment of the N0 neck is recommended.

Role of Radiation
The most common use of radiation therapy for sinonasal carcinomas is as an adjuvant therapy after surgical resection to reduce the risk of recurrence. The role of adjuvant radiation therapy should be considered in a multidisciplinary setting, with possible indications including advanced tumor stage, close or positive margins, perineural invasion, node-positive disease, or aggressive histologic characteristics. Several observational studies have demonstrated decreased recurrence rates with multimodality therapy including adjuvant radiation therapy (26). This can be delivered to the postoperative bed alone (which is the site of most recurrences) or to the postoperative bed and the draining lymphatic vessels. The role of elective nodal irradiation remains controversial, although there appears to be a risk of occult and delayed nodal recurrence, suggesting a role for elective nodal irradiation in selected cases (27,28). Chemotherapy and radiation therapy after neoadjuvant chemotherapy in patients with SNUC have been associated with improved outcomes and could become increasingly used in the future (29). Overall, radiation therapy remains a crucial component of therapy among patients with sinonasal cancer of the head and requires close collaboration between the radiation oncologist and the neuroradiologist.

Role of Chemotherapy
The use of chemotherapy in patients with sinus tumors is primarily focused on three major aspects: use of induction chemotherapy before definitive treatment, use as a radiosensitizer during definitive radiation therapy, or use as a palliative treatment in a patient with metastasis. Given the substantial difference between a curative versus a palliative intent for treatment, a thorough discussion by a multidisciplinary cancer care board is imperative. For disease sites that are amenable to definitive treatment with radiation therapy, concurrent chemotherapy is often prescribed on the basis of the histologic type of the sinus tumor. Although a variety of histologic characteristics exist for sinonasal malignancies, the most common is SCC (30,31). Patients with SCCs are most commonly treated with concurrent use of a platinum-based chemotherapeutic agent (32). In cancers with unfavorable or high-risk histologic characteristics such as undifferentiated small-cell high-grade olfactory neuroblastoma or tumors with neuroendocrine features, the optimal chemotherapy is not well defined. However, typical regimens are those used for high-grade neuroendocrine carcinoma (etoposide plus platinum-based agents, or cyclophosphamide, doxorubicin, and vincristine [ie, CAV]) (33,34).

Most published studies regarding high-grade sinonasal carcinomas report the benefit of multimodal therapy, although the best sequence has not been fully defined (26). In patients with borderline surgically resectable disease, induction chemotherapy has been used as an initial approach before locoregional treatment due to (a) the inherent risk for developing distant metastases and (b) as a predictor for sensitivity to concurrent chemotherapy and radiation therapy (26). Conversely, the greatest risk with induction chemotherapy is continued disease progression (local or distant disease) despite systemic chemotherapy, which may render the patient no longer curable.

Chemotherapeutic options for patients with metastatic disease involve the regimens outlined previously (ie, etoposide plus a platinum-based agent or CAV) for palliative treatment. Unfortunately, there is no standard chemotherapeutic regimen for treatment in patients with distant metastases, and it is critical to identify new therapy options. Next-generation sequencing with a focus on targetable actionable mutations remains an active area of research.

Primary Neoplasms of the Sinonasal Cavity
Hamartomas
Respiratory Epithelial Adenomatoid Hamartoma.—Respiratory epithelial adenomatoid hamartomas (REAHs) are benign lesions typically found in the superior aspect of the nasal cavity, often within and expanding the olfactory cleft. At histopathologic evaluation, REAHs demonstrate a proliferation of enlarged glands extending into the stroma (2). Imaging reveals a homogeneous mass centered in the upper nasal cavity, lacking invasion or osseous destruction. The mass can be bilateral and relatively symmetric across the nasal septum and is similar in appearance to sinonasal polyposis. A combined width of the olfactory cleft greater than 10 mm is suggestive of REAH (35).

Seromucinous Hamartoma.—Seromucinous hamartomas are rare lesions arising from the posterior nasal cavity and nasal septum. They manifest as polypoid masses, with many small eosinophilic glands in the stroma of the polyp at histologic evaluation. Their imaging appearance is similar to that of REAHs (36).

Nasal Chondromesenchymal Hamartoma.—Nasal chondromesenchymal hamartomas are the most heterogeneous of the hamartomas in this region, often containing calcifications and cysts and resulting in erosions of the adjacent bone (37). This hamartoma is associated with a DICER1 mutation. Patients with this tumor should be evaluated for DICER1 germline mutations and associated tumors (eg, pleuropulmonary blastoma, thyroid carcinomas, ovarian Sertoli-Leydig tumors, multiple sarcomas, and other tumors) (38).

Respiratory Epithelial Neoplasms
Sinonasal Papilloma.—Sinonasal papillomas, or Schneiderian papillomas, are benign neoplasms that arise from the Schneiderian epithelium of the sinonasal cavity. Sinonasal papillomas account for up to 4% of all sinonasal neoplasms, occur more often in men than in women, and have an average age of onset between the 4th and 6th decades of life (37,39). These neoplasms are classified into three subtypes on the basis of specific histologic features: inverted (the most common subtype), exophytic, and oncocytic (the least common subtype) (39). Inverted papillomas most often occur in the lateral nasal cavity and the ethmoid and maxillary sinuses, whereas exophytic papillomas have a predilection for the nasal septum, and oncocytic papillomas often arise from the ethmoid sinuses (39).

Features that can help to distinguish a sinonasal papilloma from an inflammatory polyp or mucosal thickening include unilateral expansion of the nasal cavity or sinus by an enhancing mass that results in bone bowing or remodeling.

Teaching Point At CT, inverted papillomas characteristically demonstrate focal hyperostosis at the attachment site of the tumor (seen in 95% of cases) (Fig 1) (39,40), which is not a common feature of the exophytic or oncocytic subtypes.
Inverted papillomas characteristically demonstrate a convoluted cerebriform pattern on both T2-weighted and contrast-enhanced T1-weighted MR images (Fig 1) (41). This cerebriform pattern can also be seen with other sinonasal neoplasms (41). Malignant degeneration to squamous cell cancer can be seen with inverted papillomas and oncocytic papillomas but is not typical of exophytic papillomas (39). Features that suggest malignant degeneration include bone destruction, extrasinus extension, and loss of the convoluted cerebriform pattern at MRI (39,41).
Inverted papilloma in a 66-year-old man who presented with a concern                         for sinusitis. (A) Axial soft-tissue unenhanced CT image shows a                         hyperattenuating mass in the left maxillary sinus (black arrows) with                         extension into the left nasal cavity (white arrow). (B) Coronal unenhanced                         CT image (bone window) shows hyperostosis of the left middle turbinate                         (arrows), likely reflecting the osseous attachment of this lesion. (C) Axial                         contrast-enhanced T1-weighted MR image shows that the mass enhances (arrows)                         after administration of contrast material, suggesting that this is not an                         antrochoanal polyp. (D) Coronal T2-weighted MR image shows that the mass has                         a “cerebriform” appearance (arrow), which is characteristic of                         an inverted papilloma. This mass was surgically resected. (E)                         Photomicrograph shows an inverted papillary growth pattern (arrows) with an                         otherwise flat apical surface. (Hematoxylin-eosin [H-E) stain; objective                         magnification, ×4.) Inset photomicrograph shows stromal edema with                         scattered infiltrating neutrophils, which are commonly observed. (H-E stain;                         objective magnification, ×40.)
Figure 1. Inverted papilloma in a 66-year-old man who presented with a concern for sinusitis. (A) Axial soft-tissue unenhanced CT image shows a hyperattenuating mass in the left maxillary sinus (black arrows) with extension into the left nasal cavity (white arrow). (B) Coronal unenhanced CT image (bone window) shows hyperostosis of the left middle turbinate (arrows), likely reflecting the osseous attachment of this lesion. (C) Axial contrast-enhanced T1-weighted MR image shows that the mass enhances (arrows) after administration of contrast material, suggesting that this is not an antrochoanal polyp. (D) Coronal T2-weighted MR image shows that the mass has a “cerebriform” appearance (arrow), which is characteristic of an inverted papilloma. This mass was surgically resected. (E) Photomicrograph shows an inverted papillary growth pattern (arrows) with an otherwise flat apical surface. (Hematoxylin-eosin [H-E) stain; objective magnification, ×4.) Inset photomicrograph shows stromal edema with scattered infiltrating neutrophils, which are commonly observed. (H-E stain; objective magnification, ×40.)

Download as PowerPoint
Given the risk of malignant degeneration, surgical approaches for resection of inverted papillomas must balance complete tumor removal with maintenance of sinonasal function. In addition, inverted papillomas have a propensity for being locally aggressive, with recurrence rates of 15%–78%, necessitating routine imaging and clinical surveillance (39,41). Identification and resection of the attachment site, which often requires drilling or cautery of the underlying hyperostotic bone, is considered vital in decreasing the risk of recurrent disease, even in cases of tumor attachment to the skull base or lamina papyracea (42). With the development of extended endoscopic approaches to the paranasal sinuses, fully endoscopic surgery is favored over open surgery in most cases (19).

Carcinomas
Squamous Cell Carcinoma, Keratinizing and Nonkeratinizing.—Epithelial tumors are the most common primary sinonasal malignancy, with SCC representing 50%–80% of all sinonasal tumors (43). Sinonasal SCC encompasses a wide group of tumors with heterogeneous biologic features. Histologically, most sinonasal SCCs are classified as either keratinizing or nonkeratinizing, with keratinizing SCCs representing 50% of sinonasal SCCs, nonkeratinizing SCCs representing 30%, and the remaining 20% representing other histologic variants (44). Sinonasal SCC shows a 2.3:1 male predilection, with nearly 80% of patients receiving the diagnosis when they are older than 55 years of age (45).

In comparison to SCC in other regions of the head and neck, various occupational exposures such as leather dust, chromium, arsenic, asbestos, and/or welding fumes are risk factors for spontaneous sinonasal SCC (46). Sinonasal SCC may also arise from malignant transformation of preexisting Schneiderian papillomas, particularly inverted papillomas, with transformation in 5%–10% of cases (47). Studies have shown that a subset of sinonasal SCCs are associated with HPV and these SCCs are most commonly the nonkeratinizing subtype (47,48). Similar to the behavior of other HPV-positive head and neck cancers, these tumors portend an overall better prognosis compared with that of HPV-negative tumors (47).

Teaching Point DEK-AFF2 fusions have been noted in a subset of SCCs. These carcinomas demonstrate low-grade papilloma–like histologic features but an aggressive clinical course, with frequent local recurrence and distant metastasis, which are at odds with the bland histologic appearance
(14).
Sixty to seventy percent of SCCs originate in the maxillary antrum, and the nasal cavity is the second most common site (Fig 2) (49). Sinonasal SCCs are characterized by aggressive behavior with frequent bone destruction of the adjacent sinus walls seen on CT images (Fig 3). On MR images, epithelial malignancies often demonstrate heterogeneous intermediate T2 signal intensity and variable degrees of moderate internal enhancement as nonspecific imaging features (6,7). Hypoxia is a common feature in many sinonasal SCCs that can lead to internal necrosis as a potentially discriminating finding (50).

SCC in a 61-year-old man who presented with left sinus pressure and                         facial pain. (A) Coronal contrast-enhanced CT image (soft-tissue window)                         shows an abnormally enhancing metastatic left level 2a lymph node (white                         arrow) and a soft-tissue mass (black arrows) representing the primary tumor                         centered in the left nasal cavity. (B) Axial contrast-enhanced CT image                         (soft-tissue window) shows the left nasal cavity mass extending posteriorly                         through the left sphenopalatine foramen (white arrow) into the                         pterygopalatine fossa (black arrow), consistent with perineural tumor                         spread. (C) Axial contrast-enhanced chest CT image at initial diagnosis                         shows multiple pulmonary metastases (arrows), indicating M1 staging. Due to                         the presence of metastatic disease, a nonsurgical treatment approach was                         employed.
Figure 2. SCC in a 61-year-old man who presented with left sinus pressure and facial pain. (A) Coronal contrast-enhanced CT image (soft-tissue window) shows an abnormally enhancing metastatic left level 2a lymph node (white arrow) and a soft-tissue mass (black arrows) representing the primary tumor centered in the left nasal cavity. (B) Axial contrast-enhanced CT image (soft-tissue window) shows the left nasal cavity mass extending posteriorly through the left sphenopalatine foramen (white arrow) into the pterygopalatine fossa (black arrow), consistent with perineural tumor spread. (C) Axial contrast-enhanced chest CT image at initial diagnosis shows multiple pulmonary metastases (arrows), indicating M1 staging. Due to the presence of metastatic disease, a nonsurgical treatment approach was employed.

Download as PowerPoint
Nonkeratinizing SCC in a 57-year-old man who presented with right                         facial swelling and pain. (A) Coronal contrast-enhanced CT image shows an                         expansile destructive enhancing soft-tissue mass (arrows) centered in the                         right maxillary sinus, with inferior extension through the right maxillary                         alveolus (arrows). (B) Axial contrast-enhanced T1-weighted MR image shows                         that the mass diffusely enhances and extends beyond the sinus into the malar                         soft tissues (arrow). (C) Coronal T2-weighted MR image shows that the mass                         is darker than what would be expected for mucosal thickening, which is                         characteristic of malignancy, and is seen to extend into the anterior                         orbital floor (white arrow) and involves the infraorbital foramen,                         indicating perineural tumor involvement along V2 (black arrow). (D) Axial                         diffusion-weighted MR image shows the mass with restricted diffusion (white                         arrow). On the basis of its extrasinus extension into the orbit and right                         palate, this tumor was staged as T4a and was treated with primary surgical                         resection followed by adjuvant radiation therapy. (E) Photomicrograph shows                         an invading front of squamous cells without appreciable keratin production                         (white arrows). (H-E stain; objective magnification, ×40.) Inset                         photomicrograph shows tumor cells that are strongly and diffusely positive                         for p16 immunohistochemical analysis, indicating that this carcinoma is HPV                         associated. (p16 immunohistochemical stain; objective magnification,                         ×40.)
Figure 3. Nonkeratinizing SCC in a 57-year-old man who presented with right facial swelling and pain. (A) Coronal contrast-enhanced CT image shows an expansile destructive enhancing soft-tissue mass (arrows) centered in the right maxillary sinus, with inferior extension through the right maxillary alveolus (arrows). (B) Axial contrast-enhanced T1-weighted MR image shows that the mass diffusely enhances and extends beyond the sinus into the malar soft tissues (arrow). (C) Coronal T2-weighted MR image shows that the mass is darker than what would be expected for mucosal thickening, which is characteristic of malignancy, and is seen to extend into the anterior orbital floor (white arrow) and involves the infraorbital foramen, indicating perineural tumor involvement along V2 (black arrow). (D) Axial diffusion-weighted MR image shows the mass with restricted diffusion (white arrow). On the basis of its extrasinus extension into the orbit and right palate, this tumor was staged as T4a and was treated with primary surgical resection followed by adjuvant radiation therapy. (E) Photomicrograph shows an invading front of squamous cells without appreciable keratin production (white arrows). (H-E stain; objective magnification, ×40.) Inset photomicrograph shows tumor cells that are strongly and diffusely positive for p16 immunohistochemical analysis, indicating that this carcinoma is HPV associated. (p16 immunohistochemical stain; objective magnification, ×40.)

Download as PowerPoint
HPV–associated Multiphenotypic Sinonasal Carcinoma.—HPV-associated multiphenotypic sinonasal carcinoma is included in this version of the WHO tumor classification system after having been previously provisionally described as HPV-related carcinoma with adenoid cysticlike features in the prior version (37). This tumor is most frequently located in the nasal cavity. Unlike adenoid cystic carcinoma (which this tumor greatly resembles at histologic examination), HPV-associated multiphenotypic sinonasal carcinoma lacks an MYB gene fusion and also lacks the propensity of adenoid cystic carcinoma for perineural tumor spread. Despite an aggressive imaging and histologic appearance, the tumor has an indolent behavior, and both regional spread and distant metastasis are rare (2).

Sinonasal Undifferentiated Carcinoma.—SNUC remains a diagnosis of exclusion, reserved for tumors with no identifiable squamous, glandular, or neuroendocrine differentiation (2). This tumor occurs predominantly in male patients (60%–70%), and the mean patient age at diagnosis is 50–60 years (34,51). SNUCs are highly aggressive tumors, with a 5-year median survival rate of 35% (34). These carcinomas are typically aggressive and appear at imaging with poorly defined margins, invasion of adjacent structures, and osseous destruction (Fig 4). This imaging appearance is similar to those of other highly cellular neoplasms of the nasal cavity, including SCC, adenocarcinoma, NUT carcinoma, lymphoma, and olfactory neuroblastoma (37).

Teaching Point IDH2 mutations have been found in 50%–80% of SNUCs, and this seems to be a mutation specific to SNUCs among tumors of the nasal cavity (2). IDH-mutated SNUCs demonstrate a better prognosis than do those with the wild type gene
(52). In addition to the prognostic significance of IDH mutation, the development of therapies targeted to the IDH pathway suggests potential therapeutic implications (53).
SNUC in a 40-year-old man who initially presented with purulent                         discharge and anosmia for 6 months. (A) Coronal unenhanced CT image (bone                         window) shows a process in the bilateral ethmoid sinuses and nasal cavity                         that erodes the ethmoid septa and cribriform plate (arrows). (B) Coronal                         T2-weighted MR image shows that this erosive process is a mass that is                         hypointense (arrows) compared with mucosal thickening. (C) Sagittal                         contrast-enhanced T1-weighted MR image shows the enhancing mass, which                         extends through the cribriform plate to involve the dura (arrow). Based on                         the dural and cribriform plate involvement, the mass was staged as T4b, and                         the patient underwent surgical resection, followed by adjuvant chemotherapy                         and radiation. (D) Photomicrograph shows an infiltrative, corded, and                         lobular growth pattern, with prominent perineural invasion (black arrows)                         and several single-cell apoptoses (white arrows). (H-E stain; objective                         magnification, ×40.) Inset photomicrograph shows tumor cells                         immunolabeled with CAM5.2 (low molecular weight cytokeratin), indicating a                         carcinomatous lineage. (CAM5.2 immunohistochemical stain; objective                         magnification, ×40.) Other lineage-specific immunohistochemical                         markers were weak or negative.
Figure 4. SNUC in a 40-year-old man who initially presented with purulent discharge and anosmia for 6 months. (A) Coronal unenhanced CT image (bone window) shows a process in the bilateral ethmoid sinuses and nasal cavity that erodes the ethmoid septa and cribriform plate (arrows). (B) Coronal T2-weighted MR image shows that this erosive process is a mass that is hypointense (arrows) compared with mucosal thickening. (C) Sagittal contrast-enhanced T1-weighted MR image shows the enhancing mass, which extends through the cribriform plate to involve the dura (arrow). Based on the dural and cribriform plate involvement, the mass was staged as T4b, and the patient underwent surgical resection, followed by adjuvant chemotherapy and radiation. (D) Photomicrograph shows an infiltrative, corded, and lobular growth pattern, with prominent perineural invasion (black arrows) and several single-cell apoptoses (white arrows). (H-E stain; objective magnification, ×40.) Inset photomicrograph shows tumor cells immunolabeled with CAM5.2 (low molecular weight cytokeratin), indicating a carcinomatous lineage. (CAM5.2 immunohistochemical stain; objective magnification, ×40.) Other lineage-specific immunohistochemical markers were weak or negative.

Download as PowerPoint
SWI/SNF Complex–Deficient Carcinoma.—SWI/SNF (switch/sucrose nonfermentable) complex–deficient carcinomas were previously provisionally included in the WHO fourth edition of the classification scheme as SMARCB1-deficient carcinomas. This category has been renamed in recognition that other genes in this SWI/SNF pathway, including SMARCB1, SMARCA2, and SMARCA4, may be implicated in similar-appearing tumors (2). SWI/SNF tumors represent up to 14% of tumors previously labeled as SNUCs (54). The SWI/SNF pathway regulates gene expression through chromatin remodeling, in effect coiling or uncoiling strands of DNA and thereby changing the rate of DNA transcription (55). The loss of these tumor suppressor genes results in a highly aggressive tumor with varying histologic features ranging from undifferentiated to glandular features and even yolk sac tumor–like features. These tumors are highly aggressive, and patients typically present with locally advanced disease (Fig 5) (37). The median survival rate has been estimated at 15 months (10).

SMARCB1-deficient sinonasal carcinoma in a 67-year-old man who                         presented with diplopia. (A) Coronal unenhanced CT image (soft-tissue                         window) shows a process within the left posterior ethmoid sinus (white                         arrow) with extension of soft tissue into the adjacent left orbital apex                         (black arrow). (B, C) Coronal T1-weighted (B) and contrast-enhanced                         T1-weighted (C) MR images show the enhancing mass (white arrow in C), which                         involves the left medial rectus and inferior rectus muscles (black arrows in                         C). The patient underwent definitive concurrent chemotherapy and radiation                         therapy with cisplatin and etoposide. (D) Photomicrograph shows a SMARCB1                         deficient sinonasal carcinoma with relatively bland, uniform, basaloid                         cytomorphology, with mitoses (black arrows), which may occur frequently.                         (H-E stain; objective magnification, ×40.) Inset photomicrograph                         shows tumor cells, with a loss of INI-1 expression at immunohistochemical                         analysis, with INI-1 retention in intervening stromal cells (white arrow).                         (INI-1 immunohistochemical stain; objective magnification,                         ×40.)
Figure 5. SMARCB1-deficient sinonasal carcinoma in a 67-year-old man who presented with diplopia. (A) Coronal unenhanced CT image (soft-tissue window) shows a process within the left posterior ethmoid sinus (white arrow) with extension of soft tissue into the adjacent left orbital apex (black arrow). (B, C) Coronal T1-weighted (B) and contrast-enhanced T1-weighted (C) MR images show the enhancing mass (white arrow in C), which involves the left medial rectus and inferior rectus muscles (black arrows in C). The patient underwent definitive concurrent chemotherapy and radiation therapy with cisplatin and etoposide. (D) Photomicrograph shows a SMARCB1 deficient sinonasal carcinoma with relatively bland, uniform, basaloid cytomorphology, with mitoses (black arrows), which may occur frequently. (H-E stain; objective magnification, ×40.) Inset photomicrograph shows tumor cells, with a loss of INI-1 expression at immunohistochemical analysis, with INI-1 retention in intervening stromal cells (white arrow). (INI-1 immunohistochemical stain; objective magnification, ×40.)

Download as PowerPoint
NUT Carcinoma.—NUT carcinoma is another highly cellular and highly aggressive sinonasal tumor. These tumors are associated with rearrangement of the nuclear protein in the testis (NUTM1) gene, typically through translocation and fusion to the BRD4 gene (56). The resulting NUT fusion oncoprotein maintains cellular proliferation and blocks differentiation, resulting in a histologically monotonous–appearing highly cellular tumor (57). The imaging features also reflect these aggressive features, with highly restricted diffusion, invasion of adjacent structures, and osseous destruction (Fig 6). NUT carcinoma is estimated to comprise 13% of poorly differentiated tumors of the sinonasal tract (58). The median progression-free survival rate is estimated at 7 months, and the median overall survival time is 10 months (59). Complete surgical resection, with negative margins, is associated with an improved overall survival rate compared with that after initial chemotherapy or radiation therapy (59). Therefore, accurate delineation of tumor margins is vital during the imaging evaluation of NUT carcinoma.

NUT carcinoma in a 44-year-old woman who presented with sinus                         inflammation symptoms. (A) Axial unenhanced CT image (soft-tissue window)                         shows opacification of the left frontal sinus, with bone erosion of the                         outer table of the frontal sinus (black arrow) and anterior extension into                         the adjacent soft tissues (white arrow). This process was initially thought                         to be inflammatory, and the patient was treated with antibiotics. Due to                         lack of symptomatic relief, MRI was performed. (B–D) Axial                         T1-weighted (B), coronal T2-weighted (C), and sagittal contrast-enhanced                         T1-weighted (D) MR images show a mass in the left frontal sinus that is                         hypointense (black arrow in B) and relatively hypointense (white arrows in                         C) compared with the normal mucosa and shows internal contrast enhancement                         (black arrows in D). The patient was subsequently treated with surgical                         resection, followed by adjuvant chemotherapy and radiation therapy. (E)                         Axial contrast-enhanced T1-weighted MR image obtained after surgical                         resection during surveillance shows that the tumor rapidly recurred, with                         intracranial extension (arrow), indicating the aggressive biology of this                         tumor. (F) Photomicrograph of the resected specimen shows predominantly                         small- to medium-sized cells with rounded to oval nuclei and scattered                         nucleoli. (H-E stain; objective magnification, × 40.) Necrosis (black                         arrow), mitoses (yellow arrow), and squamous differentiation (white arrow)                         can sometimes be seen. In the inset photomicrograph, tumor cells show                         positive immunolabeling with NUT immunohistochemistry. (NUT                         immunohistochemical stain; objective magnification, × 40.)
Figure 6. NUT carcinoma in a 44-year-old woman who presented with sinus inflammation symptoms. (A) Axial unenhanced CT image (soft-tissue window) shows opacification of the left frontal sinus, with bone erosion of the outer table of the frontal sinus (black arrow) and anterior extension into the adjacent soft tissues (white arrow). This process was initially thought to be inflammatory, and the patient was treated with antibiotics. Due to lack of symptomatic relief, MRI was performed. (B–D) Axial T1-weighted (B), coronal T2-weighted (C), and sagittal contrast-enhanced T1-weighted (D) MR images show a mass in the left frontal sinus that is hypointense (black arrow in B) and relatively hypointense (white arrows in C) compared with the normal mucosa and shows internal contrast enhancement (black arrows in D). The patient was subsequently treated with surgical resection, followed by adjuvant chemotherapy and radiation therapy. (E) Axial contrast-enhanced T1-weighted MR image obtained after surgical resection during surveillance shows that the tumor rapidly recurred, with intracranial extension (arrow), indicating the aggressive biology of this tumor. (F) Photomicrograph of the resected specimen shows predominantly small- to medium-sized cells with rounded to oval nuclei and scattered nucleoli. (H-E stain; objective magnification, × 40.) Necrosis (black arrow), mitoses (yellow arrow), and squamous differentiation (white arrow) can sometimes be seen. In the inset photomicrograph, tumor cells show positive immunolabeling with NUT immunohistochemistry. (NUT immunohistochemical stain; objective magnification, × 40.)

Download as PowerPoint
Adenocarcinoma (Intestinal Type and Nonintestinal Type).— Adenocarcinomas arise from the respiratory epithelium or the underlying seromucinous glands of the paranasal sinuses and comprise approximately 10% of all paranasal sinus neoplasms (49). Adenocarcinomas are histologically subclassified as intestinal- or nonintestinal-type tumors, both of which have a 6:1 ratio of male to female patients, in whom diagnosis occurs at 55–60 years of age (43). In terms of discriminating features, intestinal-type adenocarcinoma may arise sporadically or in association with exposure to hardwood or leather dust (49). Intestinal-type adenocarcinomas are most often localized in the ethmoid sinus complex (40%), followed by the nasal cavity (25%) (37). In distinction, nonintestinal-type adenocarcinomas are more histologically heterogeneous, and consequently, can be either low or high grade, with lower-grade tumors more common and demonstrating a predilection for the ethmoid sinus (37,60). High-grade nonintestinal adenocarcinomas are rare entities frequently arising in the maxillary sinuses and carrying a poor prognosis, with a 3-year survival rate of 30% of patients (60,61).

The imaging characteristics of adenocarcinoma are indistinguishable from those of SCC, although the frequent ethmoid sinus location of intestinal-type and low-grade nonintestinal type tumors may be one discriminating feature. On CT images, sinonasal adenocarcinomas appear as a soft-tissue mass associated with various degrees of bone erosion and/or destruction in higher-grade lesions (Fig 7). Adenocarcinomas occasionally exhibit areas of calcification, reflecting internal mucin content (50). At MRI, the signal intensity of the adenocarcinoma varies according to its cellularity and mucin content, with mucin-containing regions showing relative hyperintensity on T2-weighted MR images (Fig 7) (7).

Intestinal-type adenocarcinoma in a 70-year-old man who presented with                         a concern for a nasal polyp. (A) Coronal unenhanced CT image (bone window)                         shows an expansile process centered in the right nasal cavity eroding the                         right middle turbinate (arrow). (B) Axial fluorine 18 (18F)                         fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG) PET/CT shows that the mass is FDG avid (arrows).                         (C) Coronal T2-weighted MR image shows that the mass is slightly hypointense                         (arrows) compared with normal nasal enhancement of the right inferior                         turbinate and remains confined to the nasal cavity, without intracranial                         extension. The patient underwent surgical resection followed by adjuvant                         radiation. (D) Coronal postoperative T2-weighted MR image obtained 3 months                         after surgical resection shows a resection cavity, without tumor recurrence                         (arrows). (E) Photomicrograph shows features of adenocarcinomas of the                         tubular gut, including tubuloglandular growth, intralumenal necrosis (white                         arrow), multiple mitoses (black arrows), and mucin pools (yellow                         arrows).
Figure 7. Intestinal-type adenocarcinoma in a 70-year-old man who presented with a concern for a nasal polyp. (A) Coronal unenhanced CT image (bone window) shows an expansile process centered in the right nasal cavity eroding the right middle turbinate (arrow). (B) Axial fluorine 18 (18F) fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG) PET/CT shows that the mass is FDG avid (arrows). (C) Coronal T2-weighted MR image shows that the mass is slightly hypointense (arrows) compared with normal nasal enhancement of the right inferior turbinate and remains confined to the nasal cavity, without intracranial extension. The patient underwent surgical resection followed by adjuvant radiation. (D) Coronal postoperative T2-weighted MR image obtained 3 months after surgical resection shows a resection cavity, without tumor recurrence (arrows). (E) Photomicrograph shows features of adenocarcinomas of the tubular gut, including tubuloglandular growth, intralumenal necrosis (white arrow), multiple mitoses (black arrows), and mucin pools (yellow arrows).

Download as PowerPoint
Mesenchymal Tumors of the Sinonasal Tract
Sinonasal Tract Angiofibroma
Previously known as juvenile nasopharyngeal angiofibroma, the latest accepted terminology for this richly vascular tumor according to the WHO fifth edition is sinonasal tract angiofibroma. Sinonasal tract angiofibroma is the most common benign sinonasal tumor, accounting for 0.5% of all head and neck tumors (62–64). Adolescent male patients classically present with nasal obstruction, facial pain, and epistaxis. Although histologically benign, angiofibromas are locally aggressive, with frequent invasion into the nasal cavity, nasopharynx, and pterygopalatine fossa and advanced disease showing extension into the paranasal sinuses, orbits, and masticator space (62–65). Owing to this pattern of spread with resultant treatment implications, a staging system is used for sinonasal tract angiofibroma. In the most commonly used system, a tumor limited to the nasopharynx and nasal cavity is stage I, invasion of the pterygopalatine fossa and paranasal sinuses is stage II, invasion of the infratemporal fossa and orbit is stage III, and intracranial extension with involvement of the cavernous sinuses, sella, and optic chiasm is stage IV (66).

The tumor appears as soft-tissue attenuation on CT images centered at the sphenopalatine foramen, with remodeling of the surrounding bone structures (Fig 8). Bone remodeling or resorption is seen more commonly than is frank bone destruction. Sinonasal tract angiofibromas are typically isointense on T1-weighted MR images and hyperintense on T2-weighted MR images. Due to its vascular nature, this tumor enhances intensely and shows internal vascular flow voids (Fig 8). At histologic evaluation, this tumor is a fibrovascular lesion composed of two components: vascular spaces of various sizes and a fibrous or collagenous stroma, with fibroblasts (67).

Sinonasal tract angiofibroma in a 14-year-old adolescent boy who                         presented with epistaxis. (A) Axial unenhanced CT image (bone window) shows                         a mass centered in the left posterior nasal cavity, with opacification and                         expansion of the left sphenopalatine foramen and left pterygoplatine fossa                         (black arrows), which is especially evident when compared with the normal                         right sphenopalatine foramen (white arrow). (B) Axial contrast-enhanced                         T1-weighted MR image shows the lesion with uniform contrast enhancement                         (black arrows). (C) Sagittal projection digital subtraction angiogram with                         left internal maxillary artery selection shows the hypervascularity of the                         lesion supplied by the internal maxillary artery that is characteristic of                         an angiofibroma (arrow). The lesion was embolized before surgical resection                         was performed. (D) Photomicrograph shows an eosinophilic fibroblast-rich                         stroma populated by dilated vascular channels (white arrow) with peripheral,                         compressed, slitlike capillaries (black arrows). (H-E stain; objective                         magnification, ×10.)
Figure 8. Sinonasal tract angiofibroma in a 14-year-old adolescent boy who presented with epistaxis. (A) Axial unenhanced CT image (bone window) shows a mass centered in the left posterior nasal cavity, with opacification and expansion of the left sphenopalatine foramen and left pterygoplatine fossa (black arrows), which is especially evident when compared with the normal right sphenopalatine foramen (white arrow). (B) Axial contrast-enhanced T1-weighted MR image shows the lesion with uniform contrast enhancement (black arrows). (C) Sagittal projection digital subtraction angiogram with left internal maxillary artery selection shows the hypervascularity of the lesion supplied by the internal maxillary artery that is characteristic of an angiofibroma (arrow). The lesion was embolized before surgical resection was performed. (D) Photomicrograph shows an eosinophilic fibroblast-rich stroma populated by dilated vascular channels (white arrow) with peripheral, compressed, slitlike capillaries (black arrows). (H-E stain; objective magnification, ×10.)

Download as PowerPoint
Surgical resection is favored in the management of sinonasal tract angiofibromas. Although they are classically managed with open approaches, the data (20) support the use of endoscopic endonasal approaches. Given the highly vascular nature of the tumor, angiography with embolization of the associated branches of the external carotid artery is often performed 24–72 hours before surgery (19).

Biphenotypic Sinonasal Sarcoma
This tumor type was first introduced in the WHO fourth edition classification system (37). These tumors are often large, and patients present with regional infiltration and bone destruction. At histologic evaluation, these tumors are densely cellular and show a bland spindle cell morphology. Although they resemble schwannomas or malignant peripheral nerve sheath tumors at histologic examination, they are differentiated from these entities by the characteristic PAX3 gene rearrangement, which results in the overexpression of genes involved in neural and myogenic differentiation (2). Although these tumors are locally aggressive and large, they are also slow growing, and no cases of metastasis have been reported (36).

Other Sinonasal Tumors
Olfactory Neuroblastoma
Olfactory neuroblastoma, also known as esthesioneuroblastoma, is a malignant tumor of neural crest origin that arises in the superior nasal cavity from the olfactory epithelium and accounts for 3%–6% of nasal cavity neoplasms (68). This tumor shows a bimodal distribution pattern, with peaks in the 2nd and 6th decades of life, without a predilection for male or female individuals. Patients typically present with nasal obstruction and recurrent epistaxis (68–70). At imaging, olfactory neuroblastoma is a dumbbell-shaped mass centered in the superior nasal cavity at the cribriform plate (Fig 9). CT is a helpful initial study to identify the bone erosion at the cribriform plate (Fig 9). The tumor is heterogeneous and avidly enhancing at MRI, with the extent of superior intracranial and inferior nasal cavity extension seen best at MRI (Fig 9) (68–70). The traditionally described cyst formation at the tumor-brain interface in olfactory neuroblastoma is not a specific finding, is uncommon, and has no bearing on tumor grade (71). Olfactory neuroblastoma is one of the sinonasal tumors in which nodal metastasis is seen more commonly in comparison with other tumors. At histologic examination, it has a lobular architecture composed of primitive neuroblastoma cells in a dense neurofibrillary background (69).

Teaching Point The Kadish system is used to stage olfactory neuroblastomas, with tumors limited to the nasal cavity staged as group A; extension into the paranasal sinuses staged as group B; and extension into the skull base, cranial cavity, and orbit staged as group C (72). The modified system includes a group D for tumors with nodal or distant metastasis.
Olfactory neuroblastoma in a 41-year-old man who presented with nasal                         obstruction. (A) Coronal unenhanced CT image (bone window) shows a mass in                         the left ethmoid sinuses and nasal cavity that erodes the left lamina                         papyracea (black arrow), the ethmoid septa, the cribriform plate, and the                         roof of the left orbit (white arrow). (B) Axial fused FDG PET/CT image shows                         avid uptake in the mass (arrow). (C) Coronal contrast-enhanced T1-weighted                         MR image shows diffuse enhancement throughout the lesion with intracranial                         extension (white arrow) and intraorbital extension (black arrow). (D) Axial                         T2-weighted MR image shows that the mass is relatively hypointense compared                         with mucosal thickening (arrow). On the basis of the orbital and                         intracranial extension, this mass was staged as Kadish C. A trial of                         neadjuvant chemotherapy was attempted to decrease the size of the tumor                         before surgery, but little change was observed. Subsequently, the patient                         underwent surgical resection. (E) Photomicrograph shows nests of                         neuroendocrine cells with coarse chromatin, little to no fibrillary                         background, and occasional Flexner-Wintersteiner rosettes consisting of                         tumor cells palisading around a true central lumen (arrow). (H-E stain;                         objective magnification with oil immersion, ×100.)
Figure 9. Olfactory neuroblastoma in a 41-year-old man who presented with nasal obstruction. (A) Coronal unenhanced CT image (bone window) shows a mass in the left ethmoid sinuses and nasal cavity that erodes the left lamina papyracea (black arrow), the ethmoid septa, the cribriform plate, and the roof of the left orbit (white arrow). (B) Axial fused FDG PET/CT image shows avid uptake in the mass (arrow). (C) Coronal contrast-enhanced T1-weighted MR image shows diffuse enhancement throughout the lesion with intracranial extension (white arrow) and intraorbital extension (black arrow). (D) Axial T2-weighted MR image shows that the mass is relatively hypointense compared with mucosal thickening (arrow). On the basis of the orbital and intracranial extension, this mass was staged as Kadish C. A trial of neadjuvant chemotherapy was attempted to decrease the size of the tumor before surgery, but little change was observed. Subsequently, the patient underwent surgical resection. (E) Photomicrograph shows nests of neuroendocrine cells with coarse chromatin, little to no fibrillary background, and occasional Flexner-Wintersteiner rosettes consisting of tumor cells palisading around a true central lumen (arrow). (H-E stain; objective magnification with oil immersion, ×100.)

Download as PowerPoint
Metastatic Disease
Metastatic disease to the sinonasal cavity is rare. Epistaxis and nasal obstruction can be symptoms at clinical presentation, and in patients with a known diagnosis of a primary malignancy and new sinonasal symptoms, the index of suspicion should be high (73). Initial workup and treatment rely on making a diagnosis of metastasis and interrogating the rest of the body for additional sites of metastatic disease.

Primary tumors from the kidney (Fig 10), lungs, breasts, thyroid gland, skin (melanoma), and gastrointestinal tract have been described as metastasizing to the sinonasal cavity (73,74). Nonprimary tumors most commonly occur in the nasal cavity and maxillary sinus (73,74).

Metastatic renal cell carcinoma in a 68-year-old man who presented                         with left nasal congestion. (A) Axial unenhanced CT image (bone window)                         shows opacification of the left nasal cavity (white arrow) with bone erosion                         of the left nasal lacrimal duct (black arrow). (B) Axial contrast-enhanced                         T1-weighted MR image shows the mass enhancing uniformly (white arrows) and                         containing several flow voids (black arrow). (C) Axial T2-weighted MR image                         shows that the nasal cavity mass is slightly hypointense (white arrow)                         compared with the normal mucosa of the adjacent turbinates. There are                         several intracranial masses (black arrows) with adjacent edema in the                         cerebellum, which is consistent with metastatic disease. The                         patient's nasal cavity lesion was surgically resected. (D)                         Photomicrograph shows ciliated respiratory mucosa (arrows) with subjacent                         tumor cells with clear cell features. (H-E stain; objective magnification,                         ×40.) Inset photomicrograph shows positive PAX-8 immunohistochemical                         analysis along with clear cell cytomorphology and supports the diagnosis.                         (PAX-8 immunohistochemical stain; objective magnification,                         ×40.)
Figure 10. Metastatic renal cell carcinoma in a 68-year-old man who presented with left nasal congestion. (A) Axial unenhanced CT image (bone window) shows opacification of the left nasal cavity (white arrow) with bone erosion of the left nasal lacrimal duct (black arrow). (B) Axial contrast-enhanced T1-weighted MR image shows the mass enhancing uniformly (white arrows) and containing several flow voids (black arrow). (C) Axial T2-weighted MR image shows that the nasal cavity mass is slightly hypointense (white arrow) compared with the normal mucosa of the adjacent turbinates. There are several intracranial masses (black arrows) with adjacent edema in the cerebellum, which is consistent with metastatic disease. The patient's nasal cavity lesion was surgically resected. (D) Photomicrograph shows ciliated respiratory mucosa (arrows) with subjacent tumor cells with clear cell features. (H-E stain; objective magnification, ×40.) Inset photomicrograph shows positive PAX-8 immunohistochemical analysis along with clear cell cytomorphology and supports the diagnosis. (PAX-8 immunohistochemical stain; objective magnification, ×40.)

Download as PowerPoint
Neoplasms that metastacize to the sinonasal cavity can be differentiated from inflammatory mucosal thickening at MRI on the basis of the enhancement characteristics and T2 signal intensity of the lesion. These tumors may have differential enhancement compared with adjacent mucosa and may be hypointense at T2-weighted MRI compared with the normal hyperintensity of the sinus mucosa (Fig 10).

At CT, metastatic lesions can result in soft-tissue expansion, contrast enhancement, and bone erosion. Fluorine 18 (18F) fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG) PET/CT is particularly useful in these patients to assess for additional sites of metastatic disease or to evaluate for a potentially occult primary tumor. Unfortunately, there are no distinct imaging features that allow differentiation of nonprimary neoplasms from primary sinonasal neoplasms because these tumors exhibit similar overlapping imaging features.

Multidisciplinary cancer care board discussion should be focused on the extent of the lesion in the sinonasal cavity and should highlight additional sites of metastatic disease throughout the body to provide context for the overall disease burden. Although a palliative approach is often pursued due to overall poor prognosis, surgery is often performed if resection can provide relief of symptoms (37,73) (Fig 10).

Sinonasal Lymphoma
Sinonasal lymphoma is the second most common tumor of the sinonasal cavity after SCC. Lymphomas are hematologic malignancies that can occur in extranodal locations including the sinonasal cavity. Extranodal lymphomas are most often of the non-Hodgkin type, arising from diffuse large B cells, with the remainder arising from T cells or natural killer lymphocytes. In the sinonasal cavity, diffuse large B cells tend to have a more favorable prognosis compared with the T- or natural killer–cell variants. Extranodal natural killer–cell lymphoma, nasal type is a specific entity that occurs in the sinonasal cavity, with a relatively poor prognosis, resulting in necrosis and destruction of bone, cartilage, and soft tissue (75). The maxillary sinus followed by the nasal cavity are the most common sites of non-Hodgkin lymphoma, which often extends into adjacent compartments including adjacent fat pads, the orbits, and along the cranial nerves. Diffuse large B-cell lymphoma has a predilection for the maxillary sinus, whereas extranodal natural killer–cell lymphoma is found more often in the nasal cavity (75).

CT is often the initial imaging test for evaluation of these patients, and it may demonstrate a soft-tissue mass with expansion and bone demineralization (Fig 11). MRI is superior to CT for evaluation of the soft-tissue characteristics of the tumor. Lymphomas often exhibit T2 signal hypointensity relative to the adjacent mucosa and homogeneous contrast enhancement. Apparent diffusion coefficients of lymphomas may be lower than those of some types of SCCs, which may help to differentiate these lesions at imaging (Fig 11). FDG PET/CT may also be useful to assess for additional sites of lymphoma throughout the body.

Diffuse large B-cell lymphoma in a 59-year-old man who presented with                         left facial numbness and a mass. (A, B) Axial contrast-enhanced CT images                         (soft-tissue window, A, and bone window, B) show a hyperattenuating mass in                         the left malar soft tissues and the left maxillary sinus (arrows in A) with                         bone erosion (arrow in B). (C) Axial contrast-enhanced T1-weighted MR image                         shows that the bulk of the mass is located in the malar soft tissues (black                         arrow), with a smaller component in the left maxillary sinus (white arrow).                         (D) Axial diffusion-weighted MR image (b = 1000 sec/mm2) shows the mass with                         restricted diffusion (arrow), which is a feature often seen with lymphoma.                         The patient underwent biopsy. (E) Photomicrograph shows sheets of atypical                         lymphocytes infiltrating skeletal muscle fibers of the face. (H-E stain;                         objective magnification, ×40.) Inset photomicrograph shows diffuse                         strong positivity for CD20 immunohistochemical analysis in the lesion cells,                         indicating a clonal expansion of B-cells. (CD20 immunohistochemical stain;                         objective magnification, ×40.) The patient was treated with                         chemotherapy.
Figure 11. Diffuse large B-cell lymphoma in a 59-year-old man who presented with left facial numbness and a mass. (A, B) Axial contrast-enhanced CT images (soft-tissue window, A, and bone window, B) show a hyperattenuating mass in the left malar soft tissues and the left maxillary sinus (arrows in A) with bone erosion (arrow in B). (C) Axial contrast-enhanced T1-weighted MR image shows that the bulk of the mass is located in the malar soft tissues (black arrow), with a smaller component in the left maxillary sinus (white arrow). (D) Axial diffusion-weighted MR image (b = 1000 sec/mm2) shows the mass with restricted diffusion (arrow), which is a feature often seen with lymphoma. The patient underwent biopsy. (E) Photomicrograph shows sheets of atypical lymphocytes infiltrating skeletal muscle fibers of the face. (H-E stain; objective magnification, ×40.) Inset photomicrograph shows diffuse strong positivity for CD20 immunohistochemical analysis in the lesion cells, indicating a clonal expansion of B-cells. (CD20 immunohistochemical stain; objective magnification, ×40.) The patient was treated with chemotherapy.

Download as PowerPoint
A tumor biopsy is critical to make the diagnosis of lymphoma that will guide therapy to a nonsurgical approach. Multidisciplinary cancer care board discussion should be focused on the extent of the tumor and the specific histologic features of the lymphoma subtype. On the basis of the National Comprehensive Cancer Network guidelines, treatment typically includes a combination of chemotherapy and/or radiation therapy (75).

Conclusion
Changes in the classification of sinonasal tumors reflect the increased understanding of the genetic and molecular characteristics of these tumors (2,37). These features help to predict the pace and mechanism of tumor progression and offer the potential for individualized therapy. Radiologists should be familiar with these tumors to provide more effective care and enable collaboration among members of the multidisciplinary cancer care board and referring providers.

Disclosures of conflicts of interest.—A.R.B. Grants from GE HealthCare and Siemens Healthineers. All other authors, the editor, and the reviewers have disclosed no relevant relationships.